[July 27-8, 2021] CodeQL package manager: update CodeQL CLI docs (beta) (#6339)
github/codeql: docs/codeql/codeql-cli/publishing-and-using-codeql-packs.rst

.. pull-quote::

   Note

   The CodeQL package manager is currently in beta and subject to change. During the beta, CodeQL packs are available only in the GitHub Package Registry (GHPR). You must use version 2.5.8 or later of the CodeQL CLI to use the CodeQL package manager.

Configuring the ``qlpack.yml`` file before publishing
-----------------------------------------------------

You can check and modify the configuration details of your CodeQL pack prior to publishing. Open the ``qlpack.yml`` file in your preferred text editor.

   library: # set to true if the pack is a library. Set to false or omit for a query pack
   name: <scope>/<pack>
   version: x.x.x
   description: 
   default-suite: # a query-suite file that has been inlined
       - query:
   default-suite-file: default-queries.qls # a pointer to a query-suite in this pack
   license:
   dependencies:

- ``name:`` must follow the <scope>/<pack> format, where <scope> is the GitHub organization that you will publish to and <pack> is the name for the pack.
- Only one of ``default-suite`` or ``default-suite-file`` is allowed. Both options define a default query suite to be run.

> Running ``codeql pack publish``

Reviewer: Maybe call out somewhere that we currently only support GHCR.

Reviewer 2: 👍
https://github.com/github/codeql/pull/6339/files/87005b93e3511ae4fcfb654140fe90ec03ecf3ef#diff-4b695930f49b7fbf3ecaf6911a3f9853648dc914011209e2488a307af9a3d96cR12

-------------------------------

> When you are ready to upload a pack to a shared repository, you can run the following command:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When you are ready to upload a pack to a shared repository, you can run the following command in the root of the pack directory:
```

::

  codeql pack publish

The published package will appear in the packages section of your GitHub organization.

Running ``codeql pack download <scope>/<pack>``
-----------------------------------------------

> To run a pack that someone else has created, you must download it by running the following command:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To run a pack that someone else has created, you must first download it by running the following command:
```

::

>   codeql pack download <scope>/<pack>@x.x.x

Reviewer: note: Can accept multiple packs. Can accept query suites (see above).

> - ``<pack>``: the name for the pack that you are creating.

Reviewer 3: <pack>``: the name for the pack that you are creating. => `that you are downloading`

Reviewer 4: Great catch. Thanks.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
- ``<pack>``: the name for the pack that you want to download.
```

- ``<scope>``: the name of the GitHub organization that you will download from.
- ``<pack>``: the name for the pack that you are creating.
- ``@x.x.x``: an optional version number. If omitted, the latest version will be downloaded.

Using a CodeQL pack to analyze a CodeQL database
------------------------------------------------

To analyze a CodeQL database with a CodeQL pack, run the following command:

::

>    codeql database analyze <database> --allow-packs <scope>/<pack>@x.x.x

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   codeql database analyze <database> <scope>/<pack>@x.x.x
```

- ``<database>``: the CodeQL database to be analyzed.
- ``<scope>``: the name of the GitHub organization that the pack is published to.
- ``<pack>``: the name for the pack that you are using.
- ``@x.x.x``: an optional version number. If omitted, the latest version will be used.
 
The ``analyze`` command will run the default suite of any specified CodeQL packs. You can specify multiple CodeQL packs to be used for analyzing a CodeQL database. For example:

::

>    codeql <database> analyze --allow-packs <scope>/<pack> <scope>/<other-pack>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   codeql <database> analyze <scope>/<pack> <scope>/<other-pack>
```

> .. publishing-and-using-codeql-packs:

Reviewer 4: I get a local Sphinx warning for this too. It's missing the leading underscore.

```suggestion
.. _publishing-and-using-codeql-packs:
```

Publishing and using CodeQL packs
=================================

You can publish your own CodeQL packs and use packs published by other people.

.. pull-quote::

   Note

   The CodeQL package manager is currently in beta and subject to change. During the beta, CodeQL packs are available only in GitHub Packages - the GitHub Container Registry (GHCR). You must use version 2.5.8 or later of the CodeQL CLI to use the CodeQL package manager.

Configuring the ``qlpack.yml`` file before publishing
-----------------------------------------------------

You can check and modify the configuration details of your CodeQL pack prior to publishing. Open the ``qlpack.yml`` file in your preferred text editor.

>    library: # set to true if the pack is a library. Set to false or omit for a query pack
>    name: <scope>/<pack>
>    version: x.x.x
>    description:
>    default-suite: # a query-suite file that has been inlined
>        - query:
>    default-suite-file: default-queries.qls # a pointer to a query-suite in this pack
>    license:
>    dependencies:

Reviewer 4: I get a local warning about indentation for this code block too.

```suggestion
.. code-block:: none

   library: # set to true if the pack is a library. Set to false or omit for a query pack
   name: <scope>/<pack>
   version: x.x.x
   description:
   default-suite: # a query-suite file that has been inlined
       - query:
   default-suite-file: default-queries.qls # a pointer to a query-suite in this pack
   license:
   dependencies:
```

- Only one of ``default-suite`` or ``default-suite-file`` is allowed. Both options define a default query suite to be run.

Running ``codeql pack publish``
-------------------------------

When you are ready to upload a pack to a shared repository, you can run the following command:

::

  codeql pack publish

The published package will appear in the packages section of your GitHub organization.

Running ``codeql pack download <scope>/<pack>``
-----------------------------------------------

To run a pack that someone else has created, you must download it by running the following command:

::

  codeql pack download <scope>/<pack>@x.x.x

- ``<scope>``: the name of the GitHub organization that you will download from.
- ``<pack>``: the name for the pack that you are creating.
- ``@x.x.x``: an optional version number. If omitted, the latest version will be downloaded.

Using a CodeQL pack to analyze a CodeQL database
------------------------------------------------

To analyze a CodeQL database with a CodeQL pack, run the following command:

::

>    codeql <database> analyze --allow-packs <scope>/<pack>@x.x.x

Reviewer 2: I might be wrong, but I believe the syntax should be like the following:

```suggestion
   codeql analyze <database> --allow-packs <scope>/<pack>@x.x.x
```

Reviewer 5: It's a bit confusing, because the command is `codeql database analyze`, but then you need to specify the  `<database>` you want to run the queries against. So, altogether:

```
codeql database analyze <database> --allow-packs <scope>/<pack>@x.x.x
```

Author: I think you're right and I just pushed a fix for the typo.

Reviewer 2: Ugh, my bad. Suggesting incorrect corrections is my x-ability. 😬

.. _publishing-and-using-codeql-packs:

Publishing and using CodeQL packs
=================================

You can publish your own CodeQL packs and use packs published by other people.

.. pull-quote::

   Note

   The CodeQL package manager is currently in beta and subject to change. During the beta, CodeQL packs are available only in GitHub Packages - the GitHub Container Registry (GHCR). You must use version 2.5.8 or later of the CodeQL CLI to use the CodeQL package manager.

Configuring the ``qlpack.yml`` file before publishing
-----------------------------------------------------

You can check and modify the configuration details of your CodeQL pack prior to publishing. Open the ``qlpack.yml`` file in your preferred text editor.

.. code-block:: none

   library: # set to true if the pack is a library. Set to false or omit for a query pack
   name: <scope>/<pack>
   version: x.x.x
   description:
   default-suite: # a query-suite file that has been inlined
       - query:

>    default-suite-file: default-queries.qls # a pointer to a query-suite in this pack

Reviewer: Yes, and also, `default-suite` is optional. At most one of `default-suite` or `default-suite-file` can be specified.

   Note

   The CodeQL package manager is currently in beta and subject to change. During the beta, CodeQL packs are available only using GitHub Packages - the GitHub Container registry. You must use version 2.5.8 or later of the CodeQL CLI to use the CodeQL package manager.

Configuring the ``qlpack.yml`` file before publishing
-----------------------------------------------------

You can check and modify the configuration details of your CodeQL pack prior to publishing. Open the ``qlpack.yml`` file in your preferred text editor.

.. code-block:: none

   library: # set to true if the pack is a library. Set to false or omit for a query pack
   name: <scope>/<pack>
   version: <x.x.x>
   description: <Description to publish with the package>
   default-suite: # a query-suite file that has been inlined
       - query:
   default-suite-file: default-queries.qls # a pointer to a query-suite in this pack
   license: # optional, the license under which the pack is published

>    dependencies:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   dependencies: # map from CodeQL pack name to version range
```

- ``<pack>``: the name for the pack that you are creating.
- ``@x.x.x``: an optional version number. If omitted, the latest version will be downloaded.

> This command accepts arguments for multiple packs, as well as query suites.

Reviewer: Hmmmm...I think you should either remove the mentioning of "query suites" or go into more detail on what it means to pass that as an argument. In the short term, we might be able to consider passing a query suite as an _advanced_ or _wizards only_ option. So, we can avoid mentioning it here and simplify the docs.

Otherwise, you will need to go into some detail on how we analyze query suites for dependent packs.

Reviewer 4: I had been ignoring query suites because I was fairly confident they weren't relevant for 2.5.8. 

If query suites are something we want to encourage, but they'll need more explanation, maybe we should add this to the docs in a follow up issue?

Reviewer: Yes, let's ignore them for now.
